---
title: "ESET crackme - Part 1"
categories:
- writeup
- crackme
feature_image: "/assets/feature_images/eset.PNG"
---
This post documents my solution to the [ESET crackme](https://join.eset.com/en/challenges/crack-me). It will cover the analysis and solution of the first file, that can be downloaded from the link above.

<!-- more -->

## Downloading and opening
When clicking the "DOWNLOAD THE CRACKME.EXE PROGRAM" button on the website, the file received is named crackme.zip. Since it doesn't open as a zip archive, I analyze it with a Hex Editor:

{% include figure.html image="/assets/posts/eset-part1/file_format.PNG" caption="First few bytes of crackme.zip" %}

Apparently, this is simply a PE file. I'm not sure if this is part of the challenge or a simple way to circumvent browser warnings about downloading an executable. I change its name to crackme.exe and execute it (within a VM, of course).

{% include figure.html image="/assets/posts/eset-part1/run_first_time.PNG" caption="Executing crackme.exe" %}

So far so standard.

## Initial Analysis

The next step would be opening the file within IDA and running it with a debugger. While I do have access to an IDA license, it does not include an x86 Decompiler, and thus the analysis will be done in assembly.

IDA recognizes the file as a standard PE and auto-analyzes it properly. Once it is done, I take a look at the Strings window and find nothing interesting at all. Specifically, the prompt displayed when running, _"Please enter a valid password :"_, is not there:

{% include figure.html image="/assets/posts/eset-part1/no_strings_attached.PNG" %}

This means the strings are probably stored obfuscated, and will be deobfuscated in runtime.

Let's have a look at the beginning of the main function:

{% include figure.html image="/assets/posts/eset-part1/start_no_symbols.PNG" caption="Beginning of main function" %}

There is a call to IsDebuggerPresent, which, if true, causes the program to close immediately. This is a very simple form of Anti-Debugging, as it can be circumvented with a breakpoint at 0x4013FC, where we change eax to be 0.

In WinDbg the command `bp 4013FC "r eax=0;g"` takes care of that.

## Shedding Light on the Strings

After bypassing the Anti-Debugging mechanism, I could step through the program and watch the deobfuscation of the prompt string, but that isn't necessary.

Looking at the beginning of the next code-block, we see four function calls:
- _sub_4013A0_ with a pointer (named Buffer) and some constants as arguments.
- _WriteConsoleA_, with the same pointer as lpBuffer. This should display the prompt.
- _sub_4013A0_ again, with the exact same arguments.
- _ReadConsoleA_ - in order to retrieve the answer to the prompt.

{% include figure.html image="/assets/posts/eset-part1/main_first_block_beginning.PNG" caption="The code block after passing Anti-Debugging" %}

[Link back home](/).
