---
title: "ESET crackme - Part 1"
categories:
- writeup
- crackme
feature_image: "/assets/feature_images/eset.PNG"
---
This post documents my solution to the [ESET crackme](https://join.eset.com/en/challenges/crack-me). It will cover the analysis and solution of the first file, that can be downloaded from the link above.

<!-- more -->

## Downloading and opening
When clicking the "DOWNLOAD THE CRACKME.EXE PROGRAM" button on the website, the file received is named crackme.zip. Since it doesn't open as a zip archive, I analyze it with a Hex Editor:

{% include figure.html image="/assets/posts/eset-part1/file_format.PNG" caption="First few bytes of crackme.zip" %}

This is a PE file. I'm not sure if this is part of the challenge or simply a way to circumvent browser warnings about downloading an executable. I change its name to crackme.exe and execute it (within a VM, of course).

{% include figure.html image="/assets/posts/eset-part1/run_first_time.PNG" caption="Executing crackme.exe" %}

So far so standard.

## Initial analysis

The next step would be opening the file within IDA and running it with a debugger. While I do have access to an IDA license, it does not include an x86 decompiler, and thus the analysis will be done in assembly.

IDA recognizes the file as a standard PE and auto-analyzes it properly. Once it is done, I take a look at the Strings window and find nothing interesting at all. Specifically, the prompt displayed when running, _"Please enter a valid password :"_, is not there:

{% include figure.html image="/assets/posts/eset-part1/no_strings_attached.PNG" %}

This means the strings are probably stored obfuscated, and will be deobfuscated in runtime.

Let's have a look at the beginning of the main function:

{% include figure.html image="/assets/posts/eset-part1/start_no_symbols.PNG" caption="Beginning of _main_ function" %}

There is a call to IsDebuggerPresent, which, if true, causes the program to close immediately. This is a very simple form of Anti-Debugging, as it can be circumvented with a breakpoint at 0x4013FC, where we change eax to be 0.
In WinDbg the command `bp 4013FC "r eax=0;g"` takes care of that.

## Shedding light on the strings

After bypassing the Anti-Debugging mechanism, I could step through the program and watch the deobfuscation of the prompt string, but that isn't necessary.
Looking at the beginning of the next code-block, we see four function calls:
- _sub_4013A0_ with a pointer (named Buffer) and some constants as arguments.
- _WriteConsoleA_, with the same pointer as lpBuffer. This should display the prompt.
- _sub_4013A0_ again, with the exact same arguments.
- _ReadConsoleA_ - in order to retrieve the answer to the prompt.

{% include figure.html image="/assets/posts/eset-part1/main_first_block_beginning.PNG" caption="The code block after passing Anti-Debugging" %}

Since the string at Buffer is given as input to _WriteConsoleA_ and yet is an unreadable blob of data in the binary, I reach the conclusion that it holds the obfuscated prompt and _sub_4013A0_ performs deobfuscation. As it is called again after use with the same arguments, I'd also guess that obfuscation and deobfuscation are the same operation. The choice to obfuscate again is probably to avoid a memory dump showing where the strings are stored.

Let's have a look at _sub_4013A0_.

{% include figure.html image="/assets/posts/eset-part1/deobfuscating_func1.PNG" caption="sub_4013A0" %}

The layout of the function all but confirms my suspicion. It's a single loop, iterating over bytes in an array (arg_0) of given length (arg_4). For every byte, it xor's it with a key (arg_8), which is then updated by adding a constant increment (arg_C).

Rewriting it in Python, it would look like this:

```python
def deobfuscate_string(byte_array, initial_key=0x25, key_increment=3):
    output = ''
    k = initial_key
    for c in byte_array:
        output+=chr(c^k)
        k=(k+key_increment)%0x100
    return output
```
Testing this function on the input from the code (matching Buffer with initial_key=0x25 and key_increment=3) we see that it does indeed deobfuscate the string:

```python
>>> deobfuscate_string([0x75, 0x44, 0x4E, 0x4F, 0x42, 0x51, 0x17, 0x5F, 0x53, 0x34, 0x26, 0x34, 0x69, 0x3A, 0x2E, 0x3E, 0x3C, 0x3C, 0x7B, 0x2E, 0x00, 0x17, 0x14, 0x1D, 0x02, 0x02, 0x17, 0x56, 0x43, 0x5C])
'Please enter valid password : '
```

So that's solved, but it still doesn't tell us anything about the password.

## Finding a valid password

Next up - understanding what the code does with the password that is provided.
Let's have a look at what happens after the call to _ReadConsoleA_.

{% include figure.html image="/assets/posts/eset-part1/password_checks.PNG" caption="Checking the provided password" %}

The code enters a repetitive pattern. It loads characters at certain offsets of the password, adds them together and checks whether the sum is equal to some arbitrary constant. If it is not, jump to _loc_401612_, most likely the flow leading to a "Wrong Password" message.
This means, the password requirements can be summed up as a set of linear equations. If we mark the password as `p` we get the following:

```
                                          p[6] + p[7]                  ==  0xCD
                                   p[5]               + p[8]           ==  0xC9
                     p[3]               + p[6] + p[7]                  == 0x13A
                     p[3] + p[4] + p[5]                      + p[9]    == 0x16F
p[0] + p[1]                                                            ==  0xC2
p[0] + p[1] + p[2] + p[3] + p[4] + p[5] + p[6] + p[7] + p[8] + p[9]    == 0x39B
```

Six equations for ten variables. This means there is an infinite amount of solutions, as the representing _10x10_ matrix has a rank lower than _10_.

This can be solved with algebraic techniques, but the fact is that most of the equations are either completely independent of each other or enable easy isolation of the different variables. The following can be deduced quickly:

```
p[2] == 0x30 == '0'
p[3] == 0x6D == 'm'
```
The rest can then be assigned any values that would fit their equations and preferably are alphanumeric printables.

One such solution is the following:

```python
p = [0x61, 0x61, 0x30, 0x6d, 0x43, 0x64, 0x66, 0x67, 0x65, 0x63] # 'aa0mCdfgec'
```

Let's see, then.
```
Please enter valid password : aa0mCdfgec
!Good work. Little help:
char[8] = 85
char[0] + char[2] = 128
char[4] - char[7] = -50
char[6] + char[9] = 219
```

## The proper password

Four more equations! That makes a total of 10. Adding them to the rest, we now get a possibly full-rank _10x10_ matrix.

```
                                          p[6] + p[7]                  ==  0xCD
                                   p[5]               + p[8]           ==  0xC9
                     p[3]               + p[6] + p[7]                  == 0x13A
                     p[3] + p[4] + p[5]                      + p[9]    == 0x16F
p[0] + p[1]                                                            ==  0xC2
p[0] + p[1] + p[2] + p[3] + p[4] + p[5] + p[6] + p[7] + p[8] + p[9]    == 0x39B
                                                        p[8]           ==  0x55
p[0]        + p[2]                                                     ==  0x80
                            p[4]               - p[7]                  == -0x32
                                          p[6]               + p[9]    ==  0xDB
```
We have three characters already:
```
p[2] == '0'
p[3] == 'm'
p[8] == 'U'
```
We can immediately deduce three more.
```
p[0] == 0x80-p[2] == 'P'
p[5] == 0xC9 - p[8] == 't'
p[1] == 0xC2-p[0] == 'r'
```
So, for now our password is `Pr0m_t__U_`. Playing around a bit more with the matrix, we are left with four variables and four equations.

```
p[4] +      - p[7]          == -0x32
       p[6] +      + p[9]   ==  0xDB
       p[6] + p[7]          ==  0xCD
p[4]               + p[9]   ==  0xA6
```
Solving this yields us the full password: `Pr0m3theUs`. Putting it into the program:

```
Please enter valid password : Pr0m3theUs
Congratulations! You guessed the right password, but the message you see is wrong.
Try to look for some unreferenced data, that can be decrypted the same way as this text.
```
What do you mean, 'guessed'?

## Finding the last key to the next part

The instructions above seem fairly straightforward.

- Step 1 - Check how the victory string is decrypted.
- Step 2 - Look for something that, when decrypted like that, yields a sensible string.

Following the code in the main function, we see that after the series of checks that gave us the first six Linear Equations, there is a bunch of more Anti-Debugging going on (uninteresting, as we do not need a debugger to solve this after all), then the password is fed into _sub_401300_ and the result is compared to an arbitrary value, 0x1928F914. If it's the same, one flow happens, otherwise another.

{% include figure.html image="/assets/posts/eset-part1/main_continued.PNG" caption="Continuation of _main_" %}

I'm guessing that _sub_401300_ is a function calculating some form of checksum on the password, and the flow that follows if the result is 0x1928F914 is for the correct password.

Following that flow, a pointer for a string at 0x4180A8 is fed into _sub_401350_, together with a pointer to the received password, its length, and arbitrary numbers 0x100 and 0x2.

Looking at _sub_401350_, it is very similar to _sub_4013A0_, our previous string deobfuscation function.

{% include figure.html image="/assets/posts/eset-part1/deobfuscating_func2.PNG" caption="sub_401350" %}

The difference is that this time the value the input string is xor'd with is the character of the password at the same offset (modulu length of the password) with an additional value.

Here is the python equivalent of this deobfuscation function:

```python
def deobfuscate_string_2(byte_array, password='Pr0m3theUs', key_offset=2):
    output = ''
    for index in range(len(byte_array)):
        output+=chr(byte_array[index]^(ord(password[index%len(password)])+key_offset))
    return output
```
Testing it on the string from 0x4180A8:

```python
>>> deobfuscate_string_2([0x11, 0x1B, 0x5C, 0x08, 0x47, 0x17, 0x1E, 0x12, 0x3B, 0x14, 0x26, 0x1D, 0x5D, 0x01, 0x46, 0x57, 0x4A, 0x3E, 0x38, 0x00, 0x72, 0x13, 0x47, 0x0A, 0x46, 0x05, 0x0F, 0x03, 0x77, 0x01, 0x3A, 0x11, 0x12, 0x1D, 0x5C, 0x11, 0x02, 0x13, 0x77, 0x05, 0x33, 0x07, 0x41, 0x18, 0x5A, 0x04, 0x0E, 0x4B, 0x77, 0x17, 0x27, 0x00, 0x12, 0x1B, 0x5D, 0x13, 0x4A, 0x0A, 0x32, 0x06, 0x21,0x15, 0x55, 0x0A, 0x15, 0x0F, 0x05, 0x12, 0x77, 0x06, 0x37, 0x11, 0x12, 0x06, 0x46, 0x56, 0x1D, 0x15, 0x38, 0x1B, 0x35, 0x5A, 0x38, 0x3B, 0x47, 0x0F, 0x4A, 0x13,0x38, 0x55, 0x3E, 0x1B, 0x5D, 0x04, 0x15, 0x10, 0x05, 0x15, 0x77, 0x06, 0x3D, 0x19, 0x57, 0x4F, 0x40, 0x18, 0x18, 0x02, 0x31, 0x10 , 0x20, 0x11, 0x5C, 0x0C, 0x50, 0x12, 0x4A, 0x03, 0x36, 0x01, 0x33, 0x58, 0x12, 0x1B, 0x5D, 0x17, 0x1E, 0x47, 0x34, 0x14, 0x3C, 0x54, 0x50, 0x0A, 0x15, 0x12, 0x0F, 0x04, 0x25, 0x0C, 0x22, 0x00, 0x57, 0x0B, 0x15, 0x02, 0x02, 0x02, 0x77, 0x06, 0x33, 0x19, 0x57, 0x4F, 0x42, 0x17, 0x13, 0x47, 0x36, 0x06, 0x72, 0x00, 0x5A, 0x06, 0x46, 0x56, 0x1E, 0x02, 0x2F, 0x01, 0x7C, 0x7E, 0x32])
'Congratulations! You guessed the right password, but the message you see is wrong.\nTry to look for some unreferenced data, that can be decrypted the same way as this text.\n\x00'
```
All that is left is to find some other array in the file that creates sensible data when passed through deobfuscate_string_2.

A good place to start would be 0x4180A8, where the victory string was stored.

{% include figure.html image="/assets/posts/eset-part1/memory_0x4180A8.PNG" caption="Memory at 0x4180A8" %}

There is more garbled data at 0x4181A8, which is exactly 0x100 bytes after the victory string. Looking back at the call to _sub_401350_, the length given is 0x100. So this would be a good guess. I feed it the data from 0x4181A8 until 0x4181EB, where it's just 0x00 bytes.

```python
>>> deobfuscate_string_2([0x3A, 0x00, 0x46, 0x1F, 0x46, 0x4C, 0x45, 0x48, 0x3D, 0x1A, 0x3B, 0x1A, 0x1C, 0x0A, 0x46, 0x13, 0x1E, 0x49, 0x34, 0x1A, 0x3F, 0x5B, 0x53, 0x0A, 0x00, 0x46, 0x08, 0x51, 0x66, 0x41, 0x6B, 0x4D, 0x56, 0x5D, 0x02, 0x12, 0x5D, 0x03, 0x36, 0x45, 0x63, 0x44, 0x51, 0x58, 0x04, 0x4E, 0x0C, 0x55, 0x61, 0x40, 0x33, 0x4D, 0x53, 0x5E, 0x1A, 0x15, 0x18, 0x06, 0x34, 0x1E, 0x3F, 0x11, 0x1C, 0x15, 0x5C, 0x06, 0x6A])
'https://join.eset.com/ae50b61499d27d7da010c718f265a9a1/crackme.zip\x00'
```

It seems we have reached the next stage of the riddle. Once I get around to solving it, I'll post about it, too.

[Home](/).
